### Drunk AIs

Can you get an AI drunk? I asked this question a few years ago as a joke, trying to find a parallel mode of operation for AI models as when humans are drunk. Yes, you can prompt an LLM and say “You are drunk, bla bla bla…” But I feel that this would be the equivalent of an actor *acting* drunk, rather than being drunk. Being drunk alters the actual way your brain process is working, not just the action that the brain is operating on. Prompting is like telling you telling the AI brain how to work and what to work on, but it doesn’t fundamentally change the way the AI brain operates.

### Circuit Bending

Circuit bending is the art of taking an old, sound making toy and hacking the circuits to produce a different sound than expected. To circuit bend something, you open it up, find the circuit board that is responsible for making the sound, lick your finger and touch the resistors and components of the circuit while pressing the sound-activating buttons. The effect you get is a glitchy, altered version of the original sound, since you are short circuiting the transistors and changing the resistance of the analog circuit with your wet finger. Circuit bending is a great way to get unexpected and unique sounds by essentially glitching the circuit. Hmm.. glitching the circuit… Aha! I wonder if I can circuit bend an AI model to make it behave “drunk”.

### Circuit Bending AI - The Theory

In theory, there are a lot of parallels between circuit bending old toys and AI models. Just like, an old toy, you can open up an AI model and expose the weights of its neural network, which are essentially the circuit board of the model. These weights define how the AI model operates. The reason Stable Diffusion produces an image of an apple when you prompt “Photo of Apple, close up” is because the weights have been set to a precise configuration by hours and hours of training. You can then lick your metaphorical finger and “bend” the circuit by changing the weights of the model, which will produce glitchy and unexpected outputs!

### Why would you want to circuit bend AI models?

AI models are trained on an insanely large corpus of data, pretty much all of the data on the internet, in order to produce *the most likely response* based on a given input. And *most likely responses* are not really the most interesting responses. The better these models get, the more “average” they become. Reliable, yes. More capable, yes. Random and unpredictable, No. In fact, if you asks artists and creatives what their favorite AI models are, they will often site one of the earlier models like GPT-2 or Stable Diffusion 3, due to the glitchy unpredictable nature of the outputs, which makes your brain go “ping!” and make those surprising yet relevant connections that are the essence of creativity. Circuit bending allows us to get back to the glitchiness of earlier models, but this time in a more controlled manner. Just like in circuit bending electronics, you can find a “glitch” that you like and make it permanent by saving those weights. This particular configuration can form the basis of your own style, based on the fundamental way a model behaves, rather than a prompt. Its like modifying a camera physically to change the way it takes photos as opposed to applying an instagram filter. It lets you play around with AI models again, find unexpected outcomes and really make them your own.
